#Letter Analysis 
## A NLP Project by Tommy Xu
   
### Inspiration
Upon using various math textbooks throughout my first few years of
university studying Statistics & Computer Science, I was (like many
 others) truly humbled by the use of letters in higher level mathematics. 
It starts with "f", "x", and "y" in high school, then we add on "z" and "w" in
university calculus, then a bunch of "a", "b", "c" for arbitrary integers and 
"g" and "h" for relations & functions in discrete mathematics. This sounds simple, but
it was never easy for me. 

I noticed how using "x" and "z" is **very normal** in math language, but I can barely 
think of many *regular* words that use the letter "x" other than "x-ray" and "xylophone". 
Also, It seemed to me that **letter usage (particularly of "x", "y", "z", and others) 
in math textbooks increased as we increased the difficulty (and usually the level of abstraction) 
of the course**. This led to my main research questions.

### Main Questions

1) Are there statistical differences between letter usage patterns of math textbooks 
   and mainstream forms of written media?
   


2) Are there differences in letter usage patterrns between mathematics textbooks and textbooks 
   in *other* fields? 


3) Are there significant differences in letter usage between mathematics textbooks of 
the **same topic** but of **different difficulty** levels?
   

### Metrics
**Letter usage pattern** (LUP) will be generated by plotting letter frequency for each letter 
in the alphabet to create a line plot. Specifically,
- Letter usage will be measured in **relative letter frequency (RLF)** (# of particular letter 
     occurrences / total letter occurrences)
  
An example of the line plot:
PLACEHOLDER

[comment]: <> (![ alt text for screen readers]&#40;/path/to/image. png "Text to show on mouseover"&#41;)
  
The mathematics topics explored include algebra, calculus, and statistics, and will 
     mostly use textbooks by the same team for different year levels.
The non-mathematics textbook topics were US History, Business Law, Sociology, Economics, and Psychology.

### Viewer Guide
1) To explore how I read online textbooks using Python, see "Math Textbooks vs The World [1] - Data Collection".
2) To explore how the exploratory data analysis, see "Math Textbooks vs The World [2] - Data Exploration" (IN PROGRESS)
3) To explore the answers to the above questions, see "Math Textbooks vs The World [3] - Data Analysis" (IN PROGRESS)

### Sources & Help

All textbooks used were open source, and from the following websites:
- https://open.bccampus.ca/browse-our-collection/find-open-textbooks/
- https://aimath.org/textbooks/approved-textbooks/
- https://pretextbook.org/catalog.html



